Add article on consensus algorithms (#21)
optakt/optakt.github.io: content/knowledge/consensus_algorithms.md

The nomination may produce multiple confirmable candidates, so SCP requires the application layer to supply some method for combining them into a single composite, with the only requirement for this method to be deterministic.

SCP is an asynchronous protocol and nodes are not coordinated by time, but by the messages they exchange.
Thus, from a node’s perspective, it is not clear when the nomination process has ended.
During the nomination, it cannot be said which of the composites is the final one, but this is expected because the purpose is to produce several virtuous candidates for the balloting.

In the balloting phase nodes exchange their ballots on created composites and repeatedly conduct federated votes on statements about ballots.
From the point of view of a given node, a consensus is reached when it finds a ballot for which it can confirm (find a quorum accepting) a statement, and then it can be sure that every other well-behaved node has committed, or inevitably will commit to, the same value.

> Nodes can be categorized as either well-behaved or ill-behaved. // not sure if we need this part here or in the glossary maybe or in another named section

Reviewer: Was this forgotten or is it a plan to take care of it later on?
(I'm fine either way, just wondering if it slipped through the cracks :))

Author: Well this is a text block that I left here but I am not 100% convinced it should be here - specifically the explanation about well-behaved and ill-behaved nodes - not sure if its too much details.

Author: Decided to leave it in the text; IMO it will bring good context

# Consensus Algorithms

> This document is about explaining, at a high level, how the consensus algorithms work. After reading it, the engineer should understand the mechanism behind the consensus running Flare.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document explains, at a high level, how the different consensus algorithms work. After reading it, the engineer should understand the mechanism behind Flare's consensus mechanisms.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R3
Thanks!

## FBA and Separating Sybil Attack Resistance from Consensus by Making it a Local Selection

### Consensus

A consensus algorithm is an agreement system that follows a predefined set of steps in order to allow a group of participants (nodes) to reach to the same decision about a statement.
In a blockchain network nodes repeatedly decide what the complete history of a shared ledger is, from among multiple possible versions that occasionally conflict.

> This network-wide agreement allows the recipient of a crypto coin to have faith that the coin is both (a) valid (not counterfeit) and (b) not already spent elsewhere.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This network-wide agreement allows the recipient of a crypto coin to have faith that the coin is both valid (not counterfeit) and not already spent elsewhere.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R11,
Thanks!

### Federated Byzantine Agreement

#### Introduction

Any agreement system in a distributed computing network needs to be fault-tolerant.
This means it must produce consistent results despite errors like slow communication links, unresponsive nodes and misordered messages.

> A Byzantine agreement system is additionally tolerant of [`Byzantine`](https://medium.com/coinmonks/a-note-from-anthony-if-you-havent-already-please-read-the-article-gaining-clarity-on-key-787989107969) faults: nodes that give false information, whether due to error or in a deliberate attempt to subvert the system or gain some advantage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Byzantine agreement system is additionally tolerant of [`Byzantine faults`](https://medium.com/coinmonks/a-note-from-anthony-if-you-havent-already-please-read-the-article-gaining-clarity-on-key-787989107969): nodes that give false information, whether due to error or in a deliberate attempt to subvert the system or gain some advantage.
```

Also wouldn't this be a better link? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Byzantine_fault

It is also much more likely that a medium article would be deleted/moved/become paywalled, than a Wikipedia article. WDYT?

Author: Unfortunately yes, I dont like wikipedia explanations though. They are usually badly explained and from some higher level

Author: Corrected and updated the link here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R19
Thanks!

Reviewer 2: IMO in this context, high level is good :) Readers are free to dig deeper if they want to, but it's not the purpose of this document. The most important when it comes to external links IMO is that they should be:

* Clear, concise, factual (not tips & tricks-type articles, or blog posts, IMO)
* Reliable to stand the test of time (will not start to 404 because it's a personal blog and the person decided to get rid of it for example)
* From reliable sources (this is where Wikipedia isn't always great, but at least they do peer reviews so it's not perfect but quite reliable I'd say, on average, especially for non-political/historical subjects)

Author: Yes, what I said is that often Wikipedia links are not clear, concise and factual

Such a system prevents the double spending problem by using a form of majority called `quorum`.
A node in such a network refuses to commit to a particular version of the ledger history until it sees that enough of its peers are also prepared to commit to it.
The number of peers that is enough to make a decision is the quorum and once each of the peers commit to a value after its quorum had committed, the system form a large enough voting bloc to force the remaining nodes to agree with the decision.

> In such a system malicious nodes attempts to create double spending events, or in other way invalid transactions, will be overwhelmed by the network votes from honest nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In such a system, the attempts from malicious nodes to create double spending events, or in other way invalid transactions, are overwhelmed by the network votes from honest nodes.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R23
Thanks!

### Consensus

A consensus algorithm is an agreement system that follows a predefined set of steps in order to allow a group of participants (nodes) to reach to the same decision about a statement.
In a blockchain network nodes repeatedly decide what the complete history of a shared ledger is, from among multiple possible versions that occasionally conflict between each other.
This network-wide agreement allows the recipient of a crypto coin to have faith that the coin is both (a) valid (not counterfeit) and (b) not already spent elsewhere.

### Federated Byzantine Agreement

#### Introduction

Any agreement system in a distributed computing network needs to be fault-tolerant.
This means it must produce consistent results despite errors like slow communication links, unresponsive nodes and misordered messages.
A Byzantine agreement system is additionally tolerant of [`Byzantine`](https://medium.com/coinmonks/a-note-from-anthony-if-you-havent-already-please-read-the-article-gaining-clarity-on-key-787989107969) faults: nodes that give false information, whether due to error or in a deliberate attempt to subvert the system or gain some advantage.

> Such a system prevents the double spending problem by using a form of majority called `quorum`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such a system prevents the double spending problem by using a form of majority called _quorum_.
```

Also _quorum_ is a common English word which is used in many other contexts, so I don't know about the phrasing.

WDYT of?

```suggestion
Such a system prevents the double spending problem by relying on a quorum reaching consensus.
```

Author: Quorum is specifically used in the consensus and has its own context in it, that is why I used it

Author: Fixed here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R20
Thanks!

A node in such a network refuses to commit to a particular version of the ledger history until it sees that enough of its peers are also prepared to commit to it.
The number of peers that is enough to make a decision is the quorum and once each of the peers commit to a value after its quorum had committed, the system form a large enough voting bloc to force the remaining nodes to agree with the decision.
In such a system malicious nodes attempts to create double spending events, or in other way invalid transactions, will be overwhelmed by the network votes from honest nodes.

> In order a majority to be formed, the number of all nodes in the system must be known and its quorum to be calculated at any time.

Author: Yes, I mean the number of nodes needed to form a quorum as a % of the total number and that you cannot calculate a majority percentage of an unknown total number

> In order a majority to be formed, the number of all nodes in the system must be known and its quorum to be calculated at any time.

Author: Fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R25
Thanks!

> Opposed to this concept, in a Federated Byzantyne Agreement System (FBAS) the participants in the network are loosely defined and can join and leave at any time without coordinating with any central authority.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R26
Thanks!

> In such a system quorums are incomplete membership snapshots that can change at any time.

Author: Fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R27
Thanks!

This makes the system consensus probabilistic with some error size (probability of not reaching a consensus) present at all time.

The network does not trust a single entity to operate the network, but rather works as a decentralized system, in which each participant knows only about a group of others peers, but not about all the nodes in the network.

> In the FBA system each node has knowledge of other nodes that it considers important.

Author: This is corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R31
But does it matter?

> In the FBA system each node has knowledge of other nodes that it considers important.

Reviewer 2: It's just that since it's referred to as FBAS in other places, I think it's better to be consistent and call it FBAS everywhere or FBA System everywhere. Either way is fine for me, but consistency is key in technical writing :)

When making a decision, it waits for these important nodes to agree on a value before considering a transaction settled.
Each node of that group also has knowledge about its own list of important nodes and considers their statement on a value before deciding on a transaction.

> On a higher level the structure looks like a number of overlapping groups of nodes.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R36
Looks better now, thanks!

> Each node knows about its own group of important nodes and each node is potentially a member of a group of nodes, that another considers such a benchmarking group.

Author: Yes, I was repeating myself
I separated the the parts here  https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R31-R36
WDYT?

> Each node knows about its own group of important nodes and each node is potentially a member of a group of nodes, that another considers such a benchmarking group.

Reviewer 2: Looks good to me, thanks :)

Eventually, when enough of the network accepts a transaction, it becomes infeasible and cannot be rolled back.
This structure brings a high level of decentralization of decision making process among network members and mimics the behavior of social groups spreading a piece of information.

Federated Byzantine Agreement is a model suitable for a worldwide consensus.

> One of the famous implementations of FBA is Stellar consensus protocol [(SCP)](https://www.stellar.org/papers/stellar-consensus-protocol).

Author: Fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R42
Thanks!

> Like non-federated Byzantine agreement, FBA addresses the problem of updating replicated state, such as transaction ledger or certificate tree and by agreeing on what updates should be applied to the state, nodes avoid contradictory values and irreconciable states.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R43
Thanks!

Each state update is identified by a unique "slot", from which inter-update dependencies can be inferred.

> For example slots may be consecutively numbered positions in a sequentially appplied log.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R46
Thanks :)

FBA system runs a consensus protocol that ensures nodes are agreeing on slot contents.

> A node can update a value `x` in slot `i` when it has applied updates in all slots upon which `i` depends, additionally - the node believes that all correctly functionning nodes will eventually agree on value `x` for slot `i`.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R48
Thanks!

> This action is called externalization - the node externalized value `x` for slot `i`.

Author: This is corrected here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/64db2f71e464ae514a93b8832d18f02e2f5b2689#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R49
Thanks!

> Outside world reacts on the externalized value - agrees or objects it.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R50
Sorry about the dashes BTW, I catched myself they are not fixed, but meant to go over them later since it is a draft PR
Thanks!

> Outside world reacts on the externalized value - agrees or objects it.

Reviewer 2: No worries :) I see that you use a lot of them though 😄 Usually in technical writing they should be avoided, they are often a sign that one sentence should be broken into two sentences. There are cases for them though, but I feel like we might have a bit too many of them. Not a big deal though :)

#### Quorum slices

As a Byzantine agreement system, FBA uses the notion of `quorum` once again as a form of a majority rule.
In an FBA consensus protocol implementation, nodes exchange messages asserting statements about slots.
When a node hears a sufficient set of nodes assert one statement, it assumes no functioning node will ever contradict that statement.
This sufficient set of nodes is called a `quorum slice` or just a `slice`.

> A node in an FBA network refuses to commit to a particular value until it sees its peers are also commiting to it.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R58
Thanks!

Since in FBA the collections of participants are loosely defined, nodes quorums are not a set or a subset of a predetermined roster of nodes, but are dynamically defined from an ever-changing and inevitably incomplete snapshot of membership.

> Each node has multiple slices, any of which is sufficient to convince it of a value, so we can say that an FBA system consists of a loose federation of nodes each of which has chosen one or more slices to serve as becnhamrking for making decisions.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R61
Thanks!

Forming a quorum starts with a forming a quorum slice.
A node adds to its quorum slice nodes it knows about as well as their peers - other nodes they know about.

> Continuing this process leads to encouting more and more nodes and when no new nodes are found - the quorum is defined.

Author: Corrected here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R64-R65
Thanks!

This process of dynamically creating quorums uses the transitive closure property of the network.
With the help of this property, in an FBA system every node is potentially connected to each other node by their indirect connections to other nodes.

TODO: Add picture of nodes quorum finding

Nodes know about other nodes' quorum slices in the same manner they know about rest of the information about their network peers - from the broadcasted information that every node sends to the network whenever its voting state changes.

> Each broadcasted message includes the details of the sending node's IP and its quorum slices nodes - a typical implementation used in FBA systems (and generally in other blockchains) is [Gossip protocol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gossip_protocol).

Author: I didnt know that, thanks!

> Each broadcasted message includes the details of the sending node's IP and its quorum slices nodes - a typical implementation used in FBA systems (and generally in other blockchains) is [Gossip protocol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gossip_protocol).

Author: Fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R71-R72

> Each broadcasted message includes the details of the sending node's IP and its quorum slices nodes - a typical implementation used in FBA systems (and generally in other blockchains) is [Gossip protocol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gossip_protocol).

Reviewer 2: I also wasn't sure until I check 😄

FBA systems create confidence in the outcome of a decentralized vote by running a process called `federated voting`.
Federated voting is a procedure for discovering whether a network of participants can agree on a proposal.
In the cryptocurrency world a proposal is a ledger state with included transactions.
In a round of a federated voting process, each node must choose one of potentially many possible values as the outcome of that round.

> It cannot do so until it is sure that the other nodes in the network will not choose any different outcome.

Author: Corrected here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R78
Thanks!

To be consistent with the federated voting algorithm, the nodes exchange a flurry of messages allowing each of them to confirm that a quorum of nodes accepts the same vote.

> In FBA systems there is no majority exsting as a number - because noone knows the total size of the network, but the concept of majority is not even needed.

Author: Corrected here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R81
Thanks!

Since the system is open, it is possible someone to try to gain influence of the network by conducting a so-called Sybil attack.
A [Sybil attack](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/computer-science/sybil-attack)) is an attempt to control a peer network by creating multiple fake identities.
To outside observers, these fake identities appear to be unique peers.
As a result that entity can influence the network through additional voting power in a democratic network.

In order for the federated voting to work, one possible solution (implemented by Stellar) is to require a network property called "quorum intersection".
This means that any two quorums that can be constructed in the network with this property, will always share at least one node.
For determining the prevailing sentiment of the network, this is as good as having a majority.
Intuitively, it means that if any quorum agrees to statement `X`, no other quorum can ever agree to `not-X`, because it will necessarily include some node from the first quorum that has already voted for X.

> This is the transitive closure property that this type of systems usually use to fight against Sybil attacks.

Author: Fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R91
Thanks!

The overlapping nodes could be all Byzantine nodes.
In that case, having quorum intersection does not help the network to agree at all.
For that reason, the most important assumption about quorum intersection model is that the network enjoys quorum intersection `afer` all misbehaving nodes are removed from the network.

> A living example of such a network is internet itself. It is comprised of independent nodes that know about few local to them, but the sets overlap with each other and every node is reachabe through any other by routes and gateways.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R97
Thanks!

In the same manner, FBA network resembles inter-domain network routing with no central authority dictating or arbitraging agreements.

> If we think of quorum slices as analogous to network reachability and quorums as analogous to transitive reachability, then the Internet's nearly a complete transitive reachability suggests it can be likewise ensured a worldwide consesus with FBA.

Author: I think I missed a few words here maybe and it is unclear
There is a parallel made between quorums reachability between each other and internet networks.
Fixed here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/64db2f71e464ae514a93b8832d18f02e2f5b2689#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R99-R102

> If we think of quorum slices as analogous to network reachability and quorums as analogous to transitive reachability, then the Internet's nearly a complete transitive reachability suggests it can be likewise ensured a worldwide consesus with FBA.

Reviewer 2: It is much clearer this way indeed, thanks @AnNiran :)

Nodes can be categorized as either well-behaved or ill-behaved.
A well-behaved node chooses sensible quorum slices and obeys the protocol, including eventually responding to all requests.
An ill-behaved nodes does not.
Ill-behaved nodes suffer Byzantine failure, meaning they can behave arbitrarily.

> Since the blockchains network most iportant goal is to reach consensus deterministically - meaning reach to the same consensus value every time in the same circumstances, nodes which are generally acting arbitrarily (undeterministically) cannot be considered functioning parts of the system.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R105
Thanks!

> Expected behavior of well-behaved nodes is always `deterministic` in the sense that they will chose the same right value among others every time.

Author: This is corrected also https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R106
Thanks!

The goal of Byzantine agreement is to ensure that well-behaved nodes externalize the same values despite the presence of the ill-behaved nodes.
The first part of this goal is to prevent nodes from diverging and externalizing different values for the same slot.
Second part is to ensure the nodes can externalize values practically always, as opposed to getting blocked in some dead-state.
Corresponding to these properties are notions of safety and liveness.

TODO: add a picture of voting steps

#### Stellar

> One of the most famous consensus protocol proposed, that uses Avalanche and FBA to build decentralized networks is [Stellar Consensus Protocol (SCP)]((https://www.stellar.org/papers/stellar-consensus-protocol?locale=en)), that was decribed in 2015.

Reviewer 3: decribed -> described

Author: Yes, missed this
thanks!

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R117
Thanks!

It is used for building a decentralized leaderless computing network with overview of transactions history - Stellar payment network.

> FBA is an essential building block of the idea behind Stellar. It takes advantange of quorum intersection of well-behaved nodes as an implementation of an FBA system to guarantee safety and liveness.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R120
Thanks!

Stellar network nodes conduct multiple federated votes on multiple values until some of them goes successfully through its voting phases.
Stellar is a payment network and is logical to assume that its participants will seek to reach consensus on ledger values, but in fact they do so on `statetements` about these values, so the federated voting process runs on the statements.

> Voting in Stellar consists of two phases - namonation and balloting.

Author: Fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R124
Thanks!

> In the begining of the nomination phase, a node randomly vote for a statement on a ledger version it receives from another node in the network, for example `I nominate statement "a"`.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R125
Thanks!

Then the node, as well as all other nodes, cast out their nomination votes via messages to their peers, but also cast the nominations of their peers.
Conceptually these are separate federated votes happening in parallel at each node peer network area, each separately able to reach acceptance or confirmation.
In practice SCP protocol messages batch these separate votes together.

In the protocol, voting against a value is not defined, so a node can nominate as many statements as it likes.

> After FBA process is run on each node, a nominee is confirmed and it becomes a `candidate`.

Author: Fixed this https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R131
Thanks!

TODO: add a picture of nodes nomination in Stellar

Nomination may produce multiple confirmable candidates, so SCP requires the application layer to supply some method for combining candidates into a single composite.
The combining method can be anything the application layer calls for, as long as that method is `deterministic`, meaning that every node combining the same two candidates produces the same composite.

> In the Stellar payment network, where nominees are ledgers, combining two proposed nominees involves taking the union of the transactions they contain, and the later of their two timestamps.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R137
Thanks!

The SCP [whitepaper](https://www.stellar.org/papers/stellar-consensus-protocol?locale=en) proves (in Theorem 12) that nomination causes the network eventually to converge on a single composite candidate by the time nomination ends.

> Since SCP is an asychronous protocol and nodes are not coordinated by time, but only by the messages they exchange, from a node’s perspective it is not clear when nomination process has ended.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R140
Thanks!

Nodes will eventually reach the same composite candidate, but routes to get to it are different for each node and produce other different valid composite candidates along this path.
During this process they cannot say which of the versions is the final one.
But since nomination process is aiming to produce a number of candidates for consensus, this is an expected state from the system consensus.

In the balloting phase nodes exchange their ballots on created composites during the nomination.

> The ballots are data structures comprised of a counter and a value - the value is a candidate data and the counter is integer startign from 1.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R146
Thanks!

> The balloting repeatedly makes attempts to reach a network consensus on some candiate among the group of created ones.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R147
Thanks!

At this point it is safe to act on the value - meaning to include it in its local ledger.
In Stellar this is also called externalizing the value.
Once a ballot is confirmed committed, a node can be sure that every other well-behaved node has externalized, or inevitably will externalize, the same value.

Using the FBA voting the Stellar network is able to achieve liveness and safety for the network, as well as to FBA consensus is the most scalable solution, first implemented by Ripple (XRP) and then improved upon by Stellar (XLM). The consensus requires a special network of nodes to be known and verified ahead of time before put into use.

TODO: finish with conclusion

#### Ripple Background

TODO: add

## Avalanche and How It Uses Sampling to Achieve Deterministic Probabilistic Consensus on a Leaderless Manner that Can Scale

### Avalanche

After Nakamoto consensus algorithm, the world still wanted to have an algorithm that does have its benefits like full decentralization, but also speed and energy efficiency.

> As a solutuon to this, Avalanche was proposed by a pseudonymous group called [Team Rocket](https://medium.com/@mr_davis_12/avalanche-and-the-team-rocket-chronology-mystery-and-pseudonymity-30c17331f6a2).

Author: Fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R217
Thanks!

[Avalanche](https://assets.website-files.com/5d80307810123f5ffbb34d6e/6009805681b416f34dcae012_Avalanche%20Consensus%20Whitepaper.pdf) is a probabilistic consensus protocol based on Proof Of Stake.
Its most important property, which sets it apart from most of existing protocols, is that like Nakamoto consensus, it can operate with no known upper-bound of participants in the network.

> It aims to reach the decentralization level of Nakamoto, resiliance to 51% attacks, as well as high throughput and low latency.

Author: Fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R220
Thanks!

> It follows the idea of having some neglectable error when reaching of consensus as Nakamoto suggested (P = 1 — ε), which makes it probabilistic.

Author: The idea was a simple representation of not having a 100% certainty, that is represented by 1;
and by dividing the error from it, that can be of any value, we represent that certainty size depends on the error smaller or larger.
IMO this is understandable and is explained like this in almost all theoretical papers.
Changed it here - https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R221
but not entirely sure about it

> It follows the idea of having some neglectable error when reaching of consensus as Nakamoto suggested (P = 1 — ε), which makes it probabilistic.

Reviewer 2: I see what you meant by it and I think when you're familiar with it and used to consider probabilities like this, it's fine, but we shouldn't assume that from the reader IMO, even if it seems very basic, so I do prefer the new form that you introduced personally.

Maybe we can leave the thread open so that others can share their opinions, because I might be the only one to feel this way 😄 @awfm9 @Maelkum @ricardomgoncalves @emailtovamos @bogdanprodan-okta, any opinions?

The number of messages each node has to handle per decision is with O(k) complexity and does not grow as the network scales up, consequently the system can scale to millions of validators all participating in the consensus to achieve a global size decentralized blockchain network.

> Logically, Avalanche is a validator protocol - each node has a known number of validators (other nodes) - called validator list.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R225
Thanks!

Each of the validators stakes some amount in the network and the probability of their selection in the lists of other nodes is weighted by this staked amount.
Validators listen for transactions.
When they see a new transaction they vote on whether it is to be `Accepted` or `Rejected`.

> Transactions that appear virtuos will be voted on as `Accepted` by a validator, and validators are always expected to have deterministic behavior.

Author: Foxed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R229
Thanks!

> If the transaction is conflicting with the previous one that the validator had voted for - it will be rejected.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R230
Thanks!

Each validator is a completely independent decision maker and there is no leader election.

However, by protocol, each node uses the same process to determine whether a decision is virtuous and how likely they are in consensus with the rest of the network.
This process is referred to as `repeated random subsampling` and it determines whether a transaction is preferred and that the rest of the network agrees on this it.
At a high-level, a validator randomly selects other validators to ask them about their current statement.

> Procedure repeats multiple times on new randomly selected nodes until the node builds up enough data to determine that the probability of being correct is high enough so it can consider it is impossible to consider opposite value.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R236
Thanks!

> In order to perform the consesus algorithm like this, Avalanche contains of multiple single decree Snowball instances instantiated as a multi-decree protocol that maintains a dynamic, append-only Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) of all known transactions.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R238
Thanks!

Maintaining a DAG improves efficiency, because a single vote on a DAG vertex implicitly votes for all transactions on the path to the genesis vertex.

> It also improves security, because the DAG interwines the fate of transactions, similar to the Bitcoin blockchain - this renders past decisions difficult to undo without the approval of correct nodes.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R240
Thanks!

> When a client creates a transaction, it names one or more parent transactions, which are included inseparably in the inputs and their connections form the edges of the DAG (this parent-child relationship encoded in the DAG may or may not correspond to application specific dependencies - for example a child transaction need not spend ot have relationship with the funds received in parent transaction.

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R242-R243
Thanks!

> All transactions reachable via parent edges back in history are called - `ancestor set` and all children transactions and their offspring are called `progeny`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Transactions that are reachable via parent edges back in history are called _ancestor set_ and children transactions and their offspring are called _progeny_.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R244
Thanks!

> The central challenge in the maintainance of the DAG is to choose among conflicting transactions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The central challenge in the maintenance of the DAG is to choose among conflicting transactions.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R246
Thanks!

Avalanche instantiates a [Snowball](https://medium.com/@zaver.max/exploring-liveness-of-avalanche-d22f13b2db00) instance for each conflict set.
Snowball uses repeated queries and counters to capture the amount of confidence built in conflicting transactions.

In a given round each validator randomly selects a predefined number `n` of nodes from its validator list to query for their preferred decision on a value.
Each queried validator responds with their preferred decisions, and if the majority of responses returned in a round differ from the one the node performing the query has, then it will update its own preferred decision to reflect that and respond to other nodes with that answer.
All other validators process the same steps with subsamples of their validator lists.

When a transaction is queried, all transactions reachable from it by following the DAG edges towards its ancestor set and its progeny are implicitly part of the query.
A node will respond positively to the query if the transaction and its entire ancestry are currently the preferred option in their respective conflict sets.

> If more than a treshold of responders vote positively, the transaction is said to collect a `chit`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a specific threshold of positive responders is reached, the transaction is set to collect a _chit_.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R259
Thanks!

Nodes compute confidence in transactions as the total amount of chits they obtained - they query a transaction only once and rely on new vertices and possible chits added to the progeny to build up their confidence.

TODO: add a picture of avalanche protocol steps

> Each of the nodes perform the querying round independently and asynchronously.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nodes perform the querying round independently and asynchronously.
```

Author: But why?

Author: Corrected here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R264, but is it clear that every single node performs the process on its own; I am not a native speaker and I am not sure, WDYT?

Reviewer 2: When a sentence uses [general truth](https://www.grammaring.com/tags/grammar-tags/general-truth#:~:text=Present%20simple%20for%20general%20truths&text=The%20present%20simple%20is%20used,sun%20rises%20in%20the%20east.) like this, there's no need to specify that it's `Each of the nodes`. Saying that as a general truth, nodes do X, means that all nodes do X. I am not a native speaker either but I am 100% sure on this one 😄 

It's like saying: _magnets attract iron_. This sentence implicitly says that _all_ magnets attract iron. If something does not attract iron, it can not be qualified as a magnet.

Author: Cool, got it :) 
Thanks!

So since one node does not query every other node like in classical consensus, each node performs their own sample of randomly selected nodes, thus able to scale to hundreds of thousands or millions of nodes without adding lots of additional overhead on each node, as they are querying the same number of nodes.

With enough confidence, a decision is finalized immediately.
This process happens so quickly that Avalanche rivals major payment systems in its ability process and clear transactions in a network.

> Avalanche follows the same approach to building a probabilistic consensus algorithm as Nakamoto and goes a few steps further towards a distrubted version of Proof of Stake that scales without the need of a leader election and communication overhead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Avalanche follows the same approach to building a probabilistic consensus algorithm as Nakamoto and goes a few steps further towards a distributed version of Proof of Stake that scales without the need of a leader election and communication overhead.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R270
Thanks!

Because it operates without a leader, the system is immune to a large class of attacks that other consensus protocol families face (most importantly Sibyl attack and double spending).
The large number of validators ensures immutability and censorship resistance that proof-of-work protocols, backed by small numbers of mining pools, or classical proof-of-stake systems cannot achieve.

> The consensus supports an arbitrarily large and parametrizable set of adversaries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The consensus supports an arbitrarily large and customizable set of adversaries.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R274
Thanks!

If the network is parameterized for a 33% attacker, and an attacker has 34% stake, unlike with Classical consensus protocols where launching a double spend attack is guaranteed to succeed, with Avalanche it just means they have a slightly higher chance to succeed rather than guaranteed.

## Turning Avalanche into FBA by Making the Algorithm with Locally Defined Validator Set

### Flare System

[Flare](https://drive.google.com/file/d/15adsTes_lhi12PGMxlXfxCsoQsjXvPnS/view) is the first hybrid network that runs a version of Avalanche consensus protocol with Federated byzantine Agreement manner.
It is integrated with Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) and is aims to avoid PoW and PoS mechanisms limiting properties when running its smart contract platform.

> Flare Consensus Protocol (FCP) uses FBA and virtual voting (as Hashgraph).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Flare Consensus Protocol (FCP) uses FBA and virtual voting (like _Hashgraph_).
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R284
Thanks!

> Flare follows the FBA requirements for reaching netwrok quorum intersection after removing malicious nodes from the system, consequently - quorum interesection is again required between well-behaved nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Flare follows the FBA requirements for reaching network quorum intersection after removing malicious nodes from the system, consequently, quorum intersection is again required between well-behaved nodes.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R285
Thanks!

Unlike Ripple and Stellar, Flare Network runs smart contracts.
By integrating with EVM, the network can execute Turing complete smart contracts just like dApps in the Ethereum ecosystem.

> The protocol relies on two other assumtions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The protocol relies on two other assumptions.
```

Author: Yep, missed that
Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R290
Thanks!

First is impossibility of forging messages.
When communicating with each other, nodes are named by public keys and use cryptographically secure digital signatures when they exchange their messages.
In the context of asynchronous communication, it is assumed also, that messages exchanged between well-behaved nodes can get delayed but will eventually be delivered so the order in which they were sent might not be the order they are received.

In Flare network nodes synchronize with each other using the exchanged messages information via Gossip protocol.
After the nodes find their quorum slices, they start to send messages to random nodes from these slices.

> The first messages are the `initial` messages and they contain information about transaction amount, recipient and a hash of the sender's quorum of nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first messages are the _initial_ messages and they contain information about transaction amount, recipient and a hash of the sender's quorum of nodes.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R297
Thanks!

Recipients of messages on their turn create new messages that contain information about the received message as well as information about the messages they previously created themselves (and sent to some other node in a previous step).
Then in the same manner all the nodes send their new messages to randomly selected nodes from their quorum slices.

> In this way, each of the messages in the second turn, contains a transaction amount, recipient and and a hash of the sender node quorum, but also two extra fields: a hash of the previous message received and a hash of the previous message sent by this node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this way, each of the messages in the second turn, contains a transaction amount, recipient and a hash of the sender node quorum, but also two extra fields: a hash of the previous message received and a hash of the previous message sent by this node.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R301
Thanks!

Formally the message is a data structure with fields that is later read according to the protocol.

The creation and propagation of messages across the network is represented by a global DAG structure.
This graph tracks the history of messages that have been sent and received by each participant, meaning that it tracks the information exchanged over time.
In the DAG, messages are connected by edges and an existing edge between two messages means that it is possible to go from one vertex to the other (obtain content of message reaching it from its parent or child), each message being a vertex of the structure.

> Using the topolgy of the network that the DAG brings, ancestors of a message are all the messages that it is referencing as previous to it, in the order in time `the node sees them`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the topology of the network that the DAG brings, ancestors of a message are all the messages that it is referencing as previous to it, in the order in time the node receives them.
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R307
Thanks!

Consequently, each node is only aware of the information it received with messages sent to it.
To keep track of this information nodes have to maintain also DAGs that represents state of their local knowledge.
Given two local DAGs, a message is said to be contained in both if it contains the same fields and content.
The two DAGs are said to be consistent for this message if they also contain the same content for all of its ancestors and progeny and same edges between them.

As time progresses, some messages, by virtue of being encoded in the history of the new message, will be more widely shared throughout the network.
Once all participants are aware of them, the spread messages and their content are in the scope of global knowledge of the network.
This is captured by the idea of reachability.

Following the logic of FBA, an important part of exchanging messages between nodes is sharing them not amongst any participant, but only with the important ones for each node.
This is implementation of FBA federated quorum overlapping structure that aims to reach flexible trust between the groups.

TODO: explain strong reachability

> It is crucial that each participant in the netwrok ends up with the same ordering of messages in order to reach a consensus on the ledger history.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is crucial that each participant in the network ends up with the same ordering of messages in order to reach a consensus on the ledger history.
```

TODO: explain better

After each participant has constructed its local DAG and determined core messages, protocol proceeds to [Federated Virtual Voting process](https://drive.google.com/file/d/15adsTes_lhi12PGMxlXfxCsoQsjXvPnS/view).

An FBA construction does not rely on an economic mechanisms for securing consensus because it enables individual nodes to independently make quorum slice decisions.
Market forces cause overlaps of quorum slice decisions on the network and this gives rise to the network-wide rule for consensus.
FCP achieves fairness by being both leaderless and totally-ordered, making it excessively difficult for an attacker to influence which of two transactions will be ordered first in a transaction set.
FCP is also asynchronous and achieves very fast finality.
These properties make FCP a compelling model for internet-level `Turing-complete` consensus.

## Hash Graph as a Step before FCP

HashGraph is a consensus algorithm that offers a different approach to distributed ledger technology.
Compared to most blockchain networks, it is a privately held network with its only public version being Hedera Hashgraph network.

> Hashgraph is again a distributed ledger technology and it is described as a continuator or successor to blockchain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hashgraph is another distributed ledger technology and it is described as a continuator or successor to blockchain.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R341
Thanks!

In Hedera, as well as in other blockchains, a user can create a transaction, that will eventually be put in a block and then spread out in the network as a part of this block.

> But, instead of chosing one block to be chained to the previous one forming a chain of blocks, Hedera incorporates every block in the ledger withount discarding any of ret of the records.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But, instead of choosing one block to be chained to the previous one forming a chain of blocks, Hedera incorporates every block in the ledger without discarding any of ret of the records.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R344
Thanks!

> The hashgraph algorithm is an asynchronous Byzantine Fault Tolerant (aBFT) and Hedera system is completely asynchronous.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Hashgraph algorithm is an asynchronous Byzantine Fault Tolerant (aBFT) and Hedera system is completely asynchronous.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/f524c8d94d32f6edd6da60a9e7f74a848c44d4ce#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R346
Thanks!

# Consensus Algorithms

> This document explains, at a high level, how the different consensus algorithms work. After reading it, the engineer should understand the mechanism behind Flare's consensus mechanisms.

Author: This has been removed in the last version of the text
https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R3

## FBA and Separating Sybil Attack Resistance from Consensus by Making it a Local Selection

### Consensus

A consensus algorithm is an agreement system that follows a predefined set of steps in order to allow a group of participants (nodes) to reach to the same decision about a statement.

> In a blockchain network nodes repeatedly decide what the complete history of a shared ledger is, from among multiple possible versions that occasionally conflict between each other.

Author: This also has been updated in the last version of the text https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R11

This means it must produce consistent results despite errors like slow communication links, unresponsive nodes and misordered messages.
A Byzantine agreement system is additionally tolerant of [`Byzantine faults`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Byzantine_fault): nodes that give false information, whether due to error or in a deliberate attempt to subvert the system or gain some advantage.
Such a system prevents the double spending problem by using a form of majority called _quorum_.
A node in such a network refuses to commit to a particular version of the ledger history until it sees that enough of its peers are also prepared to commit to it.
The number of peers that is enough to make a decision is the quorum and once each of the peers commit to a value after its quorum had committed, the system form a large enough voting bloc to force the remaining nodes to agree with the decision.
In such a system, the attempts from malicious nodes to create double spending events, or in other way invalid transactions, are overwhelmed by the network votes from honest nodes.

For a majority to be formed, the number of all nodes in the system must be known and its quorum calculated at any time.

> Opposed to this concept, in a Federated Byzantine Agreement System (FBAS) the participants in the network are loosely defined and can join and leave at any time without coordinating with any central authority.

Reviewer 4: I haven't really seen `FBAS` before, I recommend we stick with FBA and put `in a Federated Byzantine Agreement (FBA) system`.

Author: This is one of the ways it is mentioned in the white paper
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/94193030/145939857-ff0c82af-d3dc-4062-947f-b606c670117c.png)

In such a system, quorums are incomplete membership snapshots that can change at any time.

> This makes the system consensus probabilistic with some error size (probability of not reaching a consensus) present at all time.

Reviewer 4: `at any time` or `at all times`.

The network does not trust a single entity to operate the network, but rather works as a decentralized system, in which each participant knows only about a group of others peers, but not about all the nodes in the network.
In the FBAS, each node has knowledge of other nodes that it considers important.
When making a decision, it waits for these important nodes to agree on a value before considering a transaction settled.

Each node of that group also has knowledge about its own list of important nodes and considers their statement on a value before deciding on a transaction.
Also each node is potentially a member of a group of nodes, that another considers a benchmarking group.

> On a higher level, the structure looks like multiple overlapping groups of participants.

Reviewer 4: We could add that this is where the term `federated` in the name comes from, because it's a federation of overlapping groups.

Eventually, when enough of the network accepts a transaction, it becomes infeasible and cannot be rolled back.
This structure brings a high level of decentralization of decision making process among network members and mimics the behavior of social groups spreading a piece of information.

Federated Byzantine Agreement is a model suitable for a worldwide consensus.
One of the famous implementations of FBA is the [Stellar Consensus Protocol (SCP)](https://www.stellar.org/papers/stellar-consensus-protocol).

> Like non-federated Byzantine agreement, FBA addresses the problem of updating replicated state, such as transaction ledger or certificate tree and by agreeing on what updates should be applied to the state, nodes avoid contradictory values and irreconcilable states.

Reviewer 4: `such as transaction ledgers or certificate trees`.

Each state update is identified by a unique "slot", from which inter-update dependencies can be inferred.
For example slots may be consecutively numbered positions in a sequentially applied log.

> FBA system runs a consensus protocol that ensures nodes are agreeing on slot contents.

Reviewer 4: `An FBA system`

A node can update a value `x` in slot `i` when it has applied updates in all slots upon which `i` depends, additionally — the node believes that all correctly functioning nodes will eventually agree on value `x` for slot `i`.

> This action is called externalization — the node externalized value `x` for slot `i`.

Reviewer 4: Let's remove the `x` and `i` here, and make this a bit simpler in language.

> Outside world reacts on the externalized value — agrees or objects it.

Reviewer 4: `The outside world`, `by agreeing or objecting to it`.

Author: This part is removed when details were removed

#### Quorum slices

As a Byzantine agreement system, FBA uses the notion of `quorum` once again as a form of a majority rule.
In an FBA consensus protocol implementation, nodes exchange messages asserting statements about slots.
When a node hears a sufficient set of nodes assert one statement, it assumes no functioning node will ever contradict that statement.

> This sufficient set of nodes is called a `quorum slice` or just a `slice`.

Reviewer 4: We can use double quotes for vocabulary, or italic, or both: "quorum", _quorum_ or _"quorum"_.

Author: This has been foxed here and everywhere https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R86
Thanks!

A node in an FBA network refuses to commit to a particular value until it sees its peers are also committing to it.

Since in FBA the collections of participants are loosely defined, nodes quorums are not a set or a subset of a predetermined roster of nodes, but are dynamically defined from an ever-changing and inevitably incomplete snapshot of membership.
Each node has multiple slices, any of which is sufficient to convince it of a value, so we can say that an FBA system consists of a loose federation of nodes each of which has chosen one or more slices to serve as benchmarking for making decisions.

> Forming a quorum starts with a forming a quorum slice.

Reviewer 4: `with the formation of`, or `with forming`.

> A node adds to its quorum slice nodes it knows about as well as their peers — other nodes they know about.

Reviewer 4: `adds other nodes to its quorum slice`

Author: This has been rephrased https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R92

Continuing this process leads to encountering more and more nodes, and when no new nodes are found the quorum is defined.
This process of dynamically creating quorums uses the transitive closure property of the network.
With the help of this property, in an FBA system every node is potentially connected to each other node by their indirect connections to other nodes.

TODO: Add picture of nodes quorum finding

Nodes know about other nodes' quorum slices in the same manner they know about rest of the information about their network peers — from the broadcast information that every node sends to the network whenever its voting state changes.

> Each broadcast message includes the details of the sending node's IP and its quorum slices nodes - a typical implementation used in FBA systems (and generally in other blockchains) is [Gossip protocol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gossip_protocol).

Reviewer 4: `a gossip protocol`

> FBA systems create confidence in the outcome of a decentralized vote by running a process called `federated voting`.

Reviewer 4: _"federated voting"_

A [Sybil attack](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/computer-science/sybil-attack)) is an attempt to control a peer network by creating multiple fake identities.
To outside observers, these fake identities appear to be unique peers.
As a result that entity can influence the network through additional voting power in a democratic network.

In order for the federated voting to work, one possible solution (implemented by Stellar) is to require a network property called "quorum intersection".
This means that any two quorums that can be constructed in the network with this property, will always share at least one node.
For determining the prevailing sentiment of the network, this is as good as having a majority.
Intuitively, it means that if any quorum agrees to statement `X`, no other quorum can ever agree to `not-X`, because it will necessarily include some node from the first quorum that has already voted for X.
This is the transitive closure property that this type of systems typically use to fight against Sybil attacks.

The overlapping nodes could be all Byzantine nodes.
In that case, having quorum intersection does not help the network to agree at all.

> For that reason, the most important assumption about quorum intersection model is that the network enjoys quorum intersection `afer` all misbehaving nodes are removed from the network.

Reviewer 4: Why does it say `afer`, and not just _after_?

Author: Because I missed the 't'

Author: This has been rephrased to simply this https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R235

> A living example of such a network is internet itself. It consists of independent nodes that know about few local to them, but the sets overlap with each other and every node is reachable through any other by routes and gateways.

Reviewer 4: `the Internet`, `about a few other nodes local to them`.

> In the same manner, FBA network resembles inter-domain network routing with no central authority dictating or arbitraging agreements.

Reviewer 4: `a FBA network`

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R125
Thanks!

> We can think of quorum slices as analogius to internet networks in terms of reachability.

Reviewer 4: `analoguous`

Servers in the internet networks can be reached via requests from neighboring networks, using gateways and hubs, making each server accessible through any client.
In quorums, nodes are reachable through their neighboring nodes, that might be in another quorum, but because of the nodes connections between each other, each node can be reached theoretically from any other.
The Internet's nearly complete transitive reachability suggests it can likewise ensure a worldwide consensus with FBA.

Nodes can be categorized as either well-behaved or ill-behaved.
A well-behaved node chooses sensible quorum slices and obeys the protocol, including eventually responding to all requests.

> An ill-behaved nodes does not.

Reviewer 4: `node`

Ill-behaved nodes suffer Byzantine failure, meaning they can behave arbitrarily.

> Since the blockchains network most important goal is to reach consensus deterministically — meaning reach to the same consensus value every time in the same circumstances, nodes which are generally acting arbitrarily (nondeterministically) cannot be considered functioning parts of the system.

Reviewer 4: `the blockchain network's most important goal`

Expected behavior of well-behaved nodes is always `deterministic` in the sense that they choose the same right value among others every time.

The goal of Byzantine agreement is to ensure that well-behaved nodes externalize the same values despite the presence of the ill-behaved nodes.
The first part of this goal is to prevent nodes from diverging and externalizing different values for the same slot.
Second part is to ensure the nodes can externalize values practically always, as opposed to getting blocked in some dead-state.

> Corresponding to these properties are notions of safety and liveness.

Reviewer 4: I would make it clearer which notion corresponds to what, maybe something like:

```
the first property corresponds to the notion of safety, while the second one corresponds to the notion of liveness.
```

TODO: add a picture of voting steps

#### Stellar

> One of the most famous consensus protocol proposed, that uses Avalanche and FBA to build decentralized networks is [Stellar Consensus Protocol (SCP)]((https://www.stellar.org/papers/stellar-consensus-protocol?locale=en)), that was described in 2015.

Reviewer 4: `consensus protocols`

I don't get the part about using Avalanche? Stellar doesn't use Avalanche at all.

Author: Yes, I missed this in the text; removed it from Stellar text;
https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R102
Thanks!

> It is used for building a decentralized leaderless computing network with overview of transactions history - Stellar payment network.

Reviewer 4: `the Stellar payment network`

FBA is an essential building block of the idea behind Stellar. It takes advantage of quorum intersection of well-behaved nodes as an implementation of an FBA system to guarantee safety and liveness.
Stellar network nodes conduct multiple federated votes on multiple values until some of them goes successfully through its voting phases.

> Stellar is a payment network and is logical to assume that its participants will seek to reach consensus on ledger values, but in fact they do so on `statetements` about these values, so the federated voting process runs on the statements.

Reviewer 4: _"statements"_

Author: This has been rephrased https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R112

Voting in Stellar consists of two phases: nomination and balloting.

> In the beginning of the nomination phase, a node randomly vote for a statement on a ledger version it receives from another node in the network, for example `I nominate statement "a"`.

Reviewer 4: `votes`

Then the node, as well as all other nodes, cast out their nomination votes via messages to their peers, but also cast the nominations of their peers.
Conceptually these are separate federated votes happening in parallel at each node peer network area, each separately able to reach acceptance or confirmation.

> In practice SCP protocol messages batch these separate votes together.

Reviewer 4: `the SCP protocol messages`

In the protocol, voting against a value is not defined, so a node can nominate as many statements as it likes.

> After FBA process is run on each node, a nominee is confirmed, and it becomes a _candidate_.

Reviewer 4: `the FBA process`

TODO: add a picture of nodes nomination in Stellar

Nomination may produce multiple confirmable candidates, so SCP requires the application layer to supply some method for combining candidates into a single composite.
The combining method can be anything the application layer calls for, as long as that method is `deterministic`, meaning that every node combining the same two candidates produces the same composite.
In the Stellar payment network, where nominees are ledgers, combining two proposed nominees involves taking the union of the transactions they contain, and the latest of their two timestamps.

The SCP [whitepaper](https://www.stellar.org/papers/stellar-consensus-protocol?locale=en) proves (in Theorem 12) that nomination causes the network eventually to converge on a single composite candidate by the time nomination ends.

> Since SCP is an asynchronous protocol and nodes are not coordinated by time, but only by the messages they exchange, from a node’s perspective it is not clear when nomination process has ended.

Reviewer 4: `the nomination process`

Nodes will eventually reach the same composite candidate, but routes to get to it are different for each node and produce other different valid composite candidates along this path.
During this process they cannot say which of the versions is the final one.

> But since nomination process is aiming to produce a number of candidates for consensus, this is an expected state from the system consensus.

Reviewer 4: `the nomination process`

From the point of view of a given node, consensus is reached when it finds a ballot for which it is able to confirm (find a quorum accepting) the statement `I commit to ballot X`.
At this point it is safe to act on the value - meaning to include it in its local ledger.
In Stellar this is also called externalizing the value.
Once a ballot is confirmed committed, a node can be sure that every other well-behaved node has externalized, or inevitably will externalize, the same value.

Using the FBA voting the Stellar network is able to achieve liveness and safety for the network, as well as to FBA consensus is the most scalable solution, first implemented by Ripple (XRP) and then improved upon by Stellar (XLM). The consensus requires a special network of nodes to be known and verified ahead of time before put into use.

TODO: finish with conclusion

#### Ripple

[Ripple consensus](https://ripple.com/files/ripple_consensus_whitepaper.pdf) is an example of a voting consensus that has some number of voting nodes for each round, but the total number of voters in the system is unknown.

> Each node that receives answers from its queried voters has knowledge of their number and can calculate majority of them or a certain percentage of them, but their number does not correspond in anyway with all voters in the network.

Reviewer 4: `the majority`

The consensus has a few components that comprise its notions for reaching an agreement: the state in which nodes in the network reach agreement.

> First component is the server.

Reviewer 4: `The first component`

> A server is any entity running the Ripple Server software which participats in the consensus protocol.

Author: I cannot reply to most of the comments above, but they have been changed or completely removed in the last version changes;
The mentioned change here is currently written as: https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R17

The second component is the ledger and it is a record of each user account representing the _ground truth_ of the network.
The notions of a server and a ledger are identical with those in rest of the described protocols in this documentation, as well as in blockchain networks in general.

> Last-Closed Ledger is the most recent ledger that has been ratified by the consensus process and thus represents the current state of the network, as opposed to open ledger, which is the current operating status of the ledger of each node.

Reviewer 4: `The last-closed ledger`

Transactions sent from the network users become part of the open ledger for each node, but of course they are considered final only after they are included in the last-closed ledger after they pass through the consensus process.

A Unique Node List (UNL) is a unique list of server nodes that each of the servers maintains.
Each server queries these nodes when executing consensus and only the votes from UNL members are considered.
Consequently the UNL represents a subnet of the Ripple network, and it is considered trustful only as a whole.

> This means the set is expected to not collude in an attempt to defraud the network, but each single member of it is not implicitly condisered trustful.

Author: This has been fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R32
Thanks!

> Any of the servers can broadcast transactions to be included in the consensus process and every server attempts to include every valid transaction when a new consensus round starts.

Author: This place has been rephrased here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R30
in order to avoid too much details

During this process each of the UNL members is in the role of a proposer of some transaction.

> In Ripple, the severs vote for transactions and for each of them the process of voting is a simple binary decision problem: each of them decides on a value 0 or 1 for the given transaction.

Reviewer 4: `servers`

The assumptions that define the consensus are:

* Every well-behaved node makes its decision for a finite time
* All well-behaved nodes reach the same decision value
* 0 and 1 are both poddible values for all well-behaved nodes

Each node in the network votes only on proposals from a trusted set of nodes (its UNL list) and each node might have different nodes in its UNL list.
The goal is reaching a consensus amongst all nodes and preventing a situation, in which two disjoint sets of nodes each reach a consensus independently thus having two last-closed ledgers.

> The Ripplie Consensus Algorithm (RPCA) is applied every few seconds by all nodes and once the consensus is reached - the ledger is considered _closed_.

Reviewer 4: `Ripple`

> If the consensus process finish successfully, all netowork nodes will have identical ledger history.

Reviewer 4: `network`

The ledger is closed and becomes the new last-closed ledger.

In Ripple, the notion of _majority rule_ is applied on the UNL set requirement for agreement.
From a high level this system is a group of overlapping groups of nodes, because some of the nodes in one UNL list are present in another UNL for another node.
The notion of hard majority cannot be applied in Ripple, because the total number of servers in the system is unknown, consequently there is no hard number of voters for any of the participants.

Each of the servers can join or leave the network at some point, which means that in some of the consensus rounds some servers will have different nodes in their UNL lists.

## Avalanche and How It Uses Sampling to Achieve Deterministic Probabilistic Consensus on a Leaderless Manner that Can Scale

### Avalanche

After Nakamoto consensus algorithm, the world still wanted to have an algorithm that does have its benefits like full decentralization, but also speed and energy efficiency.
To solve this, Avalanche was proposed by a pseudonymous group called [Team Rocket](https://medium.com/@mr_davis_12/avalanche-and-the-team-rocket-chronology-mystery-and-pseudonymity-30c17331f6a2).

> [Avalanche](https://assets.website-files.com/5d80307810123f5ffbb34d6e/6009805681b416f34dcae012_Avalanche%20Consensus%20Whitepaper.pdf) is a probabilistic consensus protocol based on Proof Of Stake.

Reviewer 4: `Proof of Stake`

Its most important property, which sets it apart from most of existing protocols, is that like Nakamoto consensus, it can operate with no known upper-bound of participants in the network.
It aims to reach the decentralization level of Nakamoto, resilience to 51% attacks, as well as high throughput and low latency.
It follows the idea of having some neglectable error when reaching of consensus as Nakamoto suggested, which makes it probabilistic and means there is no 100% certainty of reaching a consensus.

> The number of messages each node has to handle per decision is with O(k) complexity and does not grow as the network scales up, consequently the system can scale to millions of validators all participating in the consensus to achieve a global size decentralized blockchain network.

Reviewer 4: `has O(k) complexity`

> Logically, Avalanche is a validator protocol. Each node has a known number of validators (other nodes) called _validator list_.

Author: This has been fixed and rephrased https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R177
Thanks!

Each of the validators stakes some amount in the network and the probability of their selection in the lists of other nodes is weighted by this staked amount.
Validators listen for transactions.

> When they see a new transaction they vote on whether it is to be `Accepted` or `Rejected`.

Reviewer 4: Why not just `whether it is to be accepted or rejected`?

Author: Yes, this has been corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R22
Thanks!

Transactions that appear virtuous are voted on as `Accepted` by a validator, and validators are always expected to have deterministic behavior.
If the transaction is conflicting with the previous one that the validator had voted for, is is rejected.
Each validator is a completely independent decision maker and there is no leader election.

However, by protocol, each node uses the same process to determine whether a decision is virtuous and how likely they are in consensus with the rest of the network.

> This process is referred to as `repeated random subsampling` and it determines whether a transaction is preferred and that the rest of the network agrees on this it.

Reviewer 4: _"repeated random subsampling"_

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R182-R183
Thanks!

At a high-level, a validator randomly selects other validators to ask them about their current statement.

> Procedure repeats multiple times on new randomly selected nodes until the node builds up enough data to determine that the probability of being correct is high enough that it can be considered impossible to consider the opposite value.

Author: This has been fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/36f9498f4e9ec4d1a9156c35097f90b4cf20ebbd#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R184
Thanks!

> In order to perform the consensus algorithm like this, Avalanche contains of multiple single decree Snowball instances instantiated as a multi-decree protocol that maintains a dynamic, append-only Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) of all known transactions.

Reviewer 4: `degree`, `multi-degree`

Maintaining a DAG improves efficiency, because a single vote on a DAG vertex implicitly votes for all transactions on the path to the genesis vertex.
It also improves security, because the DAG intertwines the fate of transactions, similar to the Bitcoin blockchain, which renders past decisions difficult to undo without the approval of correct nodes.

When a client creates a transaction, it names one or more parent transactions, which are included inseparably in the inputs and their connections form the edges of the DAG.

> This parent-child relationship encoded in the DAG may or may not correspond to application specific dependencies — for example a child transaction need not spend to have relationship with the funds received in parent transaction.

Reviewer 4: `need not spend funds received in a parent transaction`

Author: This sentence has been removed when cutting out details in the information.

Each queried validator responds with their preferred decisions, and if the majority of responses returned in a round differ from the one the node performing the query has, then it will update its own preferred decision to reflect that and respond to other nodes with that answer.
All other validators process the same steps with subsamples of their validator lists.

When a transaction is queried, all transactions reachable from it by following the DAG edges towards its ancestor set and its progeny are implicitly part of the query.
A node will respond positively to the query if the transaction and its entire ancestry are currently the preferred option in their respective conflict sets.
If a specific threshold of positive responders is reached, the transaction is set to collect a _chit_.
Nodes compute confidence in transactions as the total amount of chits they obtained - they query a transaction only once and rely on new vertices and possible chits added to the progeny to build up their confidence.

TODO: add a picture of avalanche protocol steps

Nodes perform the querying round independently and asynchronously.

> So since one node does not query every other node like in classical consensus, each node performs their own sample of randomly selected nodes, thus able to scale to hundreds of thousands or millions of nodes without adding lots of additional overhead on each node, as they are querying the same number of nodes.

Reviewer 4: It's a very bold claim that it should work for that many nodes. I would prefer to remove that and just talk about a high number of nodes. The sub-samples should also be in a certain relationship with the total number of nodes (something like _n_ and _logn_) to keep the same probabilities, so the complexity should actually be `O(logn)` rather than `O(k)` like mentioned earlier.

Author: This has been rephrased https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R204

With enough confidence, a decision is finalized immediately.

> This process happens so quickly that Avalanche rivals major payment systems in its ability process and clear transactions in a network.

Reviewer 4: Let's remove the marketing talk. It happens quickly enough to have a high throughput of payments on its network.

Author: Removed, thanks!

Avalanche follows the same approach to building a probabilistic consensus algorithm as Nakamoto and goes a few steps further towards a distributed version of Proof of Stake that scales without the need of a leader election and communication overhead.

> Because it operates without a leader, the system is immune to a large class of attacks that other consensus protocol families face (most importantly Sibyl attack and double spending).

Reviewer 4: This is no longer really true, though, with Snowman++. It turns out having no leader creates a lot of contention on the network, which leads to wasted communication and tons of reverted blocks, reducing throughput drastically.

Author: Removed, thanks!

The large number of validators ensures immutability and censorship resistance that proof-of-work protocols, backed by small numbers of mining pools, or classical proof-of-stake systems cannot achieve.

The consensus supports an arbitrarily large and customizable set of adversaries.
If the network is parameterized for a 33% attacker, and an attacker has 34% stake, unlike with Classical consensus protocols where launching a double spend attack is guaranteed to succeed, with Avalanche it just means they have a slightly higher chance to succeed rather than guaranteed.

## Turning Avalanche into FBA by Making the Algorithm with Locally Defined Validator Set

### Flare System

> [Flare](https://drive.google.com/file/d/15adsTes_lhi12PGMxlXfxCsoQsjXvPnS/view) is the first hybrid network that runs a version of Avalanche consensus protocol with Federated byzantine Agreement manner.

Reviewer 4: `Byzantine`

Author: Fixed everywhere, thanks!

> It is integrated with Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) and is aims to avoid PoW and PoS mechanisms limiting properties when running its smart contract platform.

Author: This part has been removed

Flare Consensus Protocol (FCP) uses FBA and virtual voting (like _Hashgraph_).
Flare follows the FBA requirements for reaching network quorum intersection after removing malicious nodes from the system, consequently, quorum intersection is again required between well-behaved nodes.

Unlike Ripple and Stellar, Flare Network runs smart contracts.
By integrating with EVM, the network can execute Turing complete smart contracts just like dApps in the Ethereum ecosystem.

The protocol relies on two other assumptions.
First is impossibility of forging messages.
When communicating with each other, nodes are named by public keys and use cryptographically secure digital signatures when they exchange their messages.
In the context of asynchronous communication, it is assumed also, that messages exchanged between well-behaved nodes can get delayed but will eventually be delivered so the order in which they were sent might not be the order they are received.

> In Flare network nodes synchronize with each other using the exchanged messages information via Gossip protocol.

Reviewer 4: `a gossip protocol`

As time progresses, some messages, by virtue of being encoded in the history of the new message, will be more widely shared throughout the network.
Once all participants are aware of them, the spread messages and their content are in the scope of global knowledge of the network.
This is captured by the idea of reachability.

Following the logic of FBA, an important part of exchanging messages between nodes is sharing them not amongst any participant, but only with the important ones for each node.
This is implementation of FBA federated quorum overlapping structure that aims to reach flexible trust between the groups.

TODO: explain strong reachability

It is crucial that each participant in the network ends up with the same ordering of messages in order to reach a consensus on the ledger history.
To achieve this stage, participants first compute the slot number of the messages contained in their DAG, and then determine which of the messages are core messages.
The first messages of each slot are called core messages.
If a message is a core message and is furthermore not a fork, it is said to be a unique core message.
TODO: explain better

> After each participant has constructed its local DAG and determined core messages, protocol proceeds to [Federated Virtual Voting process](https://drive.google.com/file/d/15adsTes_lhi12PGMxlXfxCsoQsjXvPnS/view).

Reviewer 4: `the protocol proceeds`

> An FBA construction does not rely on an economic mechanisms for securing consensus because it enables individual nodes to independently make quorum slice decisions.

Reviewer 4: `an economic mechanism` or `economic mechanisms`

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5R264
Thanks!

Market forces cause overlaps of quorum slice decisions on the network and this gives rise to the network-wide rule for consensus.
FCP achieves fairness by being both leaderless and totally-ordered, making it excessively difficult for an attacker to influence which of two transactions will be ordered first in a transaction set.
FCP is also asynchronous and achieves very fast finality.
These properties make FCP a compelling model for internet-level `Turing-complete` consensus.

## Hash Graph as a Step before FCP

HashGraph is a consensus algorithm that offers a different approach to distributed ledger technology.

> Compared to most blockchain networks, it is a privately held network with its only public version being Hedera Hashgraph network.

Reviewer 4: `the Hedera Hashgraph network`

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/21/commits/ca80e6c74bee64b8ce712ca515bb205ee645d971#diff-4bf8323c6426a93da1ce22be1b8528779ef6b61fdacef3e0d065f1e1dd47bea5L210
Thanks!

Hashgraph is another distributed ledger technology and it is described as a continuator or successor to blockchain.

In Hedera, as well as in other blockchains, a user can create a transaction, that will eventually be put in a block and then spread out in the network as a part of this block.

> But, instead of choosing one block to be chained to the previous one forming a chain of blocks, Hedera incorporates every block in the ledger without discarding any of ret of the records.

Reviewer 4: `any of the records`

The Hashgraph algorithm is an asynchronous Byzantine Fault Tolerant (aBFT) and Hedera system is completely asynchronous.
The main assumption upon which the consensus relies is that 2/3 of the nodes are well-behaved nodes, which are expected to act deterministically.

So on a high level, the network operates on DAG structure that record time sequenced transactions at its vertices.
Each message contains one or more transactions, a timestamp, digital signature, hashes of two earlier events.

Hashgraph is currently patented and the only authorized ledger is Hedera Hashgraph.

> Ownership of Hedera Hashgraph is held by a governing council that comprises leading organizations like Google, IBM, Boeing, Tata Communications, etc.

Reviewer 4: That's really not relevant for this document.

> Hedera energy consumption per transaction is 0,00017kwh compared to Bitcoin - 885+ kwh, and Ethereum - 102+ kwh. //? Do we need this here?

Reviewer 4: No, we don't.

> Hedera proceeds 10 000+ transactions per second. // ?

Reviewer 4: Not relevant, marketing talk.
